The following is a conversation with Elon Musk his third time on this the likes Friedman podcast.
And now a quick view second mention of each sponsor check them out in the description is the best way to support this podcast.
First is the third of greens the all-in-one nutrition drink I drink twice a day second is Butcher box high-quality meat that makes up most of my diet.
Third is inside tracker,
a service that used to track my biological data fourth is Roca my favorite sunglasses and prescription glasses and fifth is a sleep a self cooling mattress cover I sleep on so the choice is nutrition food
Health style or sleep Choose Wisely my friends.
And now on to the full ad reads as always no ads in the middle I tried make this interesting but if you skip them please still check out the sponsors I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too.
This show is brought to you by athletic greens and its newly named AG one drink which is an all-in-one daily drink to support Better Health and people formance,
he replaced a multivitamin for me and went far beyond that was 75 vitamins and minerals it's the first thing I drink every day I drink it twice a day in fact I drink it after a,
long run I recently did
16 mile run and I can't tell you how good it felt to get back and pour myself a refreshing athletic greens and start the day Iran fasted,
that's probably one of my favorite things to do.
Run for a long period of time and an empty stomach thinking through the problems of the day,
or the problems of life in general and then get back to sort of ground to normal life by,
drinking athletic greens getting in the shower and just hitting the ground running with a little bit of coffee and focus
anyway they'll give you one month supply of fish oil when you sign up at athletic greens.com Lex that's athletic greens.com Lex.
This show is brought to you by butcher box high-quality meat that is pretty much the only thing I eat they ship a box of meat to your home 8 to 14 pounds of it you can pick a premade box or customize one
which is what I do.
And that's it it's pretty simple I've spoken about this before I thank me of different kinds is a makes up a large part of my diet.
I just feel good when I consume a large amount of meat it's not an allergy thing it's not some kind of,
reducing information think I don't know what it is because I also I'm pretty happy eating carbs as well I just feel better I'm happier I can perform better,
both physically and mentally want to consume a large amount of me whether that's a carnivore or keto diet I just feel great.
And put your box is just high quality meat that I can rely on there's all kinds of cuts there but ground beef is the basics and the thing I love the most.
For a limited time butcher box is offering new members a great deal for the new year sign up a butcher box.com Lex and you'll receive the ultimate New Year's bundle in your first box this deal includes ground beef chicken thighs and more.
That's more than seven pounds of meat added to your first box for free get this New Year's bundle before it's gone by going to butcher box.com Lex.
This show is also brought to you by inside tracker a service that used to track biological data they have a bunch of plans most of which include a blood test that gives you a lot of information that you can then make decisions based on they have algorithms
I love
the world the algorithms that analyze your blood data DNA data and fitness tracker data to provide you with a clear picture of what's going on inside you and to offer you signs back
recommendations for positive diet and lifestyle changes Andrew huberman the great the powerful engine humor in talks a lot about it David Sinclair,
he by the way was just on his podcast that you should check out also talks a lot about it
in my conversation with him and in his conversation with others I love this idea it feels like the future you should definitely be making lifestyle and,
Health decision based on actual data connected to you not just the general population you are a special
unique biological fingerprint that requires unique treatment unique lifestyle decisions.
For a limited time you can get 25% off the entire inside tractor store if you go to inside track a.com Lex that's inside tracker.com Lex.
This show is brought to you by Roka the maker of glasses and sunglasses that I love wearing
for their design feel and Innovation on materials Optics and grip
Rocco was started by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and was born out of an obsession with performance like I said I love the word Obsession and performance and I got a chance to meet a hang out a bunch with one of those founders,
Rob incredible human being here in Austin they have a facility here in Austin it's just cool to see people at the top of their game in terms of both design and manufacture and all that kind of stuff.
These glasses first of all look badass look amazing but they're also designed to be active in extremely lightweight the grip is comfortable but strong.
And the style I said bad ass but it's bad ass in a classy way it holds up in all conditions when I'm wearing a suit or wearing running gear including on long runs in hundred degree Austin whether or.
In freezing Boston whether both work check them out for both prescription glasses and sunglasses at Roca.com and enter code Lex to save 20% off your first order that's the Roku.com and enter code Lex.
This episode is also brought to you by eight sleep
and it's pod Pro mattress it controls temperature with an app is packed with sensors and can cool down to as low as 55 degrees on each side of the bed separately given that
I just got out of said bed I could tell you because it's short-term memory that the thing feels incredible
there's very few things I enjoy life as much as a power nap or full night sleep and they cooled bed,
with a warm blanket.
My mind empty of thoughts having fought the battles of the day and just resting escaping it all in a little bit of a dream world.
Alice in Wonderland but I like Lex.
In Wonderland they have a pod Pro covers you can just add that to your mattress without having to buy theirs but their mattress is nice too,
they can track a bunch of metrics like heart rate variability but cooling alone is worth the money go to a sleep.com legs to get special savings that's eight sleep.com Lex.
And I will meet you there my friend in the dream world.
This is the Luxe Friedman podcast and here is my conversation with you on.
Music.
Yeah make yourself comfortable now wow okay you don't do the headphones thing no.
I mean how could I get need to give this thing the closer you are the sexiest on hey babe yeah I get enough of your love baby.
Clip that out time somebody messaged me why you water somebody and you think I'm sexy come right out and tell me so.
Hey dude.
So good okay so serious mode activate all right serious mode on your Russian you can be seriously and give everyone serious all the time in Russian yeah we'll get there we'll get there.
Yeah it's gotten soft allow me to say that the SpaceX launch of human beings to orbit on May 30th 2020.
Was seen by many as the first step in a new era of human space exploration.
These human spaceflight missions were a Beacon of Hope to me into millions over the past two years is our world has been going through one of the most difficult periods in recent human history.
We saw we see the rise of division fear cynicism and the loss of common Humanity
right when it is needed most so first Elon let me say thank you for giving the world hope and reason to be excited about the future so it's kind of you to say I do want to do that,
Humanity has.
Obviously a lot of issues and and you know people times do bad things but you know despite all that you know I love humanity and I think we should.
Picture we've do everything we can to have a good future and an exciting future and one way that maximizes the happiness of the people.
Let me ask about crew Dragon demo to so that that first flight with humans on board how did you feel leading up to that launch we scared are you excited I was going through your mind so much was at stake.
Yeah no that was extremely stressful the question we obviously cannot let them down anyway so.
Extremely stressful it's safe to say the least we did I was confident that at the time that we launched that no one could think of anything.
At all.
To do that would improve the probability of success and we racked our brains to think of any possible way to improve the probability of success we cannot think of anything more and and no could NASA and so
and that's just the best that we could do so then we hit we went ahead and launched now I'm not a religious person
but I nonetheless got on my knees and prayed for that mission
we able to sleep.
No I didn't feel when it was a success first one the launch was a success and when they return back home or back to Earth.
There's a great relief
yeah.
It's for high-stress situations I find it's not too much Elation as relief and you know I think once as we got more comfortable and proved out the systems because,
you know we really.
Are you going to make sure everything works the I was it was definitely a lot more enjoyable with the subsequent asteroid missions and I thought the,
the inspiration mission was was actually very inspiring as person for Mission at a drink I'd encourage people to watch the inspiration documentary on Netflix it's actually really good and it really isn't so I I was actually inspired by that
and I
so that one I felt I was kind of able to enjoy the actual Mission not just be super stressed all the time so for people that somehow don't know it's the all civilian
first time all civilian out to space style to orbit there was I think the highest orbit that as in like
I know 30 or 40 years or something the only one that was higher was the one shuttle sorry a Hubble servicing Mission and then before that it would have been Apollo in 72.
It's pretty wild so it's cool it's good you know I think
as a species like we want to be you know continuing to
do better and reach Higher Ground and like I think would be tragic extremely tragic if Apollo was the high-water mark for Humanity you know and that then that's as far as we ever got
and it's it's concerning that here we are.
49 years after the last mission to the moon and so almost half a century and we've not been back and that's.
That's worrying it's like is that does that mean we've picked as a civilization or what so,
like I think we got to get back to the moon and bouillabaisse there you know a science-based I think we could learn a lot about the nature of the universe if we have a proper science base on the moon,
you're like we have a science base in Antarctica and you know many other parts of world and,
so that that that's what I think the next big thing we've got to have like a serious like moon base and then get people to Mars and.
You know get get out there and be a spacefaring civilization I'll ask you about some of those details but
Since you're so busy with the hard engineering challenges of everything that's involved are you still able to Marvel at the magic of it all of space travel of every time the rocket goes up especially when it's a crewed mission.
Are you just so overwhelmed with the all the challenges that you have to solve
and actually sort of to add to that.
The reason I want to ask this question of May 30th it's been some time so you can look back and think about the impact already it's already at the time it was an engineering problem Maybe.
Now it's becoming a historic moment like it's a moment that how many moments will be remembered about the 21st century to me.
That or something like that maybe inspiration for one of those would be remembered as the early steps of a new age of space exploration.
Yeah during the launches itself so I mean I think I think maybe some of you will know it a lot of y'all don't know is I got I'm actually a chief engineer of Space X so the.
You know that I've signed off on pretty much all the design decisions and you know so if there's something that goes wrong with that.
Vehicle it's fundamentally my fault you know so so I'm really just thinking.
About all the things that like so so when I see the rocket I see all the things that could go wrong and the things that could be better and the same with the dragon spacecraft it's like,
people say oh this is a spacecraft or a rocket and that's this looks really cool I'm like I've like a readout of like this is that these that these are the risks these are the problems that's what I see.
Like teach not what other people see when they see the product you know so let me ask you then to analyze Starship in that same way.
I know you have you talked about in more detail about
in the near future perhaps you had that look about it now if you want but just in that same way like you said you see when you see up when you see a rocket you see a sort of a list of risks in that same way you said that Starship is a really hard problem.
So many ways I can ask this but.
If you magically could solve one problem perfectly one engineering problem perfectly which one would it be on Sasha.
Unser and Starship so is it may be related to the efficiency the the engine the weight of the different components the complexity of various things maybe the controls of the crazy thing as to do to land,
no it's actually the by far the the biggest thing absorbing my time is a engine production.
The design of the engine but I can't I've often said prototypes are,
easy production is hard so we have the most advanced rocket engine that's ever been designed.
The because I said currently the best rocket engine error is probably the rd-180 one already 170 that that the door rushing engine basically and,
and still it I think an engine should only count if it's gotten something to orbit
so our engine has not gotten anything to orbit yet but it is it's the first engine that's actually.
Better than the Russian army engines which I were amazing design.
So you talking about Raptor engine what makes it amazing what are the different aspects of it that.
Make it like a what are you the most excited about if the whole thing works in terms of efficiency all those kinds of things.
Well it's varactor is a full flow staged combustion.
Engine and it's at operating at a very high chamber pressure so one of the key figures marriage we have stick or key figure of Merit is what is the
the pressure at which the rocket engine can operate that's the combustion chamber pressure so raptor is
designed to operate it 300 bar possibly maybe higher the standard atmospheres so.
For the record right now for operational engine is the Rd engine that I mentioned the Russian party which is I believe around 267 bar.
And the the the difficulty of the chamber pressure is increases on a nonlinear basis so,
and more Terra pressure is more like 50% more difficult
but that that air pressure is that that is what allows you to get a very high power density for the engine so enabling.
A very high thrust-to-weight ratio and,
a very high specific impulse so specific impulse is like a measure of the efficiency of a rock and roll it's really the the.
Effective exhaust velocity of the gas coming out of the engine
so.
Whether with a very high chamber pressure you can have,
a compact engine that nonetheless has a high expansion ratio which is the ratio between the exit nozzle,
and the throat,
so you know engines got like you see rocket I just got like sort of like a bat like a hourglass shape it's like a chamber and then it next down and there's a nozzle and the ratio of the the exit diameter to the throat expansion ratio
so why is it such a hard engine to manufacture at scale.
It's very complex it's a lot of them what is complexity mean here's a lot of components involved there's a lot of a lot of components and a lot of.
Unique materials that so we had to invent a several Alloys that don't exist in order to make this engine work
materials problem too,
so materials problem and,
it is in a stage combustion of fulfilling stage combustion there are many feedback loops in the system so basically you've got
propellants and and and Hot Gas flowing simultaneously to so many different places on the engine,
and they all have a recursive effect on each other so you change one thing here has a recursive effect here changes something over there and end it,
it's quite hard to control like there's a reason no one's made this before but.
And the reason we're doing a stage combustion full flow is because it has the highest up at the highest vertical possible efficiency so.
In order to make a fully reusable rocket.
Which that's the really the Holy Grail of over rocketry you have to have everything's got to be the best it's got to be the best engine
the best airframe the vest heat shield extremely light Avionics,
you're very clever control mechanisms you've got to shed mass in any possible way that you can for example we are instead of putting Landing legs on the booster and Chip we are going to catch them with a tower
to save the weight of the landing LED legs so that's like.
I mean we're talking about catching the largest flying object ever made with,
on a giant Tower with with Chopstick arms like Karate Kid
with fly but much bigger any pulling this is like probably won't work the first time in area so there's not as banana stuff so you mentioned that you doubt
well not you doubt but there there's days or moments when you doubt that this is even possible it's so difficult.
The possible part is well at this point well I think we will get Starship to work.
There's question of timing
how long will it take us to do this how long will it take us to actually achieve full and Rapid reusability because it will take a probably many launches before we are able to have full and rapid reusability
but I can't say that the physics pencils out like the like we're not.
At this point I'd say we're confident that that say like let's say I'm very confident sick
success is in the set of all possible outcomes that we're all set for a while there I was not convinced that success was in the set of possible outcomes so which is a very important actually but so we were.
Saying there's a chance I'm saying there's a chance exactly just not sure how.
How long it will take we're very very talented team they're working night and day to make it happen and.
Like so that the critical thing to achieve for the revolution in spaceflight in for Humanity
to be a spacefaring civilization is to have a fully and rapidly reusable rocket over the rocket there's not even been any over rocket that's been fully reusable ever and this is always been the the the Holy Grail of
rocketry and many smart people very smart people have tried to do this before and they're not succeeded,
so because it's such a hard problem what's your source of belief,
in situations like this when the engineering problem is so difficult there's a lot of experts many of whom you admire who have failed in the past yes and.
A lot of people you know the a lot of experts maybe journalists all the kinds of you know the public in general have a lot of doubt about whether it's possible.
And you yourself know that even if it's a non null set non empty set of success it's still unlikely or very difficult like where do you go to both personally.
Intellectually as engineer as a team like for source of strength needed to sort of persevere through this.
And to add keep going with the project take it to completion.
It's also strength I just really not how I think about things I mean for me it's simply this this is something that is important to get done and we should just keep doing it or die trying
and I don't need a source of strength that quitting is not even like,
guess not it's not in my nature and I don't care about optimism or pessimism.
Can you then Zoom back in the specific problems with Starship or any engineering problems to work on
can you try to introspect your particular biological neural network your thinking process and describe how you think
through problems the different engineering design problems is there like a systematic process you spoken about first principles thinking but they're kind of process to it.
Well
you know like saying like like physics is low and everything else was a recommendation.
Like I've met a lot of people that can break the law but I'm having that met anyone who could break physics so so first for you know any kind of.
Technology problem you have just sort of just make sure you're not violating physics and.
You know,
first principles analysis I think is something that can be applied to really any Walk of Life anything really it's just it's really just saying you know let's let's well something down to the most fundamental.
Principles the things that we are most confident are true at a foundational level and that's it's your at your success your axiomatic base and then you reason up from there and then you cross check your conclusion against the the axiomatic truth.
So
you know some basics in physics would be like all you fighting conservation of energy or momentum or something like that you know then you know it's not going to work so.
That's so that's just to establish it is it is it possible
and then another good physics tool is thinking about things in the limit if you if you take a particular thing and you scale it to a very large number or two very small number hardest how do things change.
Both like tempura like in number of things you manufacture something like that and then in time.
Yeah like the 68 example of like like manufacturing which I think is just a very underrated problem and and.
Likes it it's much harder to.
Take it an advanced technology product and bring it into volume manufacturing that it is to design it in the first place my orders of magnitude so let's say you're trying to figure out is.
Like why is this
the sub part or product expensive is it because of something fundamentally foolish that we're doing or is it because our volume is too low and so then you say okay well what if I volume was a million units here is a still expensive.
That's what I mean radical thinking about things to the Limit if it's still expensive at a million units a year than volume is not the reason why your thing is expensive there's something fundamental about design.
And then you then can focus on the complete reducing complexity or something like that in the discussions designed to change trains depart to be something that is.
Not fundamentally expensive but it like there's a common thing in rocketry because the the
unifying this is relatively low and so a common excuse would be well it's expensive because I unit volume is low and if we were in like Automotive or something like that or consumer electronics then our costs will be lower on like like Okay so let's say
we skip that now you making a million year to year is a still expensive the answer is yes then economies of scale are not the issue.
Do you throw into manufacturing do you throw like supply chain talked about resources and materials and stuff like that do you throw that into the calculation of trying to reason from first principles like how we're going to make the supply chain work here.
Yeah yeah and then the cost of materials things like that or is that too much exactly so like another like a good example I could thinking about things in the limit is if you take any.
Yeah any product a machine or whatever.
If I take a rocket or whatever and say
if you've got if you look at the room raw materials in the rocket so you're going to have like.
Aluminum steel titanium inconel special specialty Alloys copper and and you say,
what are the what's the weight of the constituent elements of each of these elements and what is the raw material value.
And that sets the asymptotic limit for how low the cost of the vehicle can be unless you change the materials,
so and then when you do that I'll call it like maybe the magic wand number or something like that so that would be like if you had the
like just a pile of these raw materials here and you could wave a magic wand and rearrange the atoms into the final shape that would be the
lowest possible cost that you could make this thing for unless you change the materials so then and that is always a usually almost always a very low number,
so then what's actually causing least expensive is how you put the items into the desired shape.
Yeah actually if you don't mind me taking a tiny tangent had a I often talk to Jim Keller who's something to work with you so yeah so German was so yeah good great work at Tesla.
So I suppose he carries the flame of the same kind of thinking that you're talking about now.
And I guess I see that same thing at Tesla and and SpaceX folks who work there they kind of learn this way of thinking and it kind of becomes obvious almost but anyway I had argument not argument.
He educated me about how cheap it might be to manufacture Tesla body
we just we had an argument what is how can you reduce the cost of scale of producing a robot because if I got a chance to interact quite a bit
obviously in the academic circles with humanoid robots and then my Boston Dynamics and stuff like that and they're very expensive to build
and then Jim kind of schooled me on saying like Okay like this kind of first principles thinking of how can we get the cost of manufacture down
I suppose you do that you have done that kind of thinking for Tesla bought in for all kinds of.
All kinds of complex systems that are traditionally seen as complex and you say okay how can we simplify everything out.
Yeah I think if you are really good at Manufacturing.
You can basically make at high-volume you could basically make anything for a cost.
That asymptotically approaches is the room of raw material value of the constituents plus any IP intellectual property that you need to do license anything right
but it's hard it's not like that's a very hard thing to do but it is
possible for anything,
anything in volume can be made of like I said for a cost that asymptotically approaches is raw material constituents + intellectual property license right.
So what will happen happen in trying to design a product is people sought with the tools and parts and methods that they are familiar with and then at and try to create the product using their existing tools and methods
the other way to think about it is actually imagine the try to imagine the platonic ideal of the perfect,
product or technology whatever it might be and say what is this what is the perfect arrangement of atoms that would be the best possible product
and now let us try to figure out how to get the items in that shape.
I mean it sounds it's almost like Rick and Morty absurd until you start to really think about it and it,
you really should think about it in this way because everything else is kind of if you think,
you might fall victim to the momentum of the way things were done in the past unless you thinking this way well just as a function of inertia people,
I want to use the same tools and methods that they are familiar with.
That's what they'll do by default yeah and then that will lead to an outcome of things that can be made with those tools and methods but it is unlikely to be the platonic ideal of the perfect product.
Um so then so that's why it's good to think of things in both directions that like what can we build with the tools that we have but then but what also what is the.
What is the perfect the theoretical perfect product look like and that that theoretical Perfect part is going to be a moving Target because the as you learn more the
definition of or that perfect product will change because you don't actually know what the perfect part is but you can successfully approximate a a more perfect product,
so think about it like that.
And then saying okay now what tools methods materials whatever do we need to create in order to get the atoms in that shape.
Fitbit for people very rarely think about it that way but it's a powerful tool.
I should mention that the brilliant Siobhan Zyliss is hanging hanging out with us in case you hear a voice of wisdom from from from outside from up above.
Okay so let me ask you about Mars you mentioned it would be great for science to put a base on the moon to do some research but.
The truly big leap again in this category of seemingly impossible is to put a human being on Mars when do you think SpaceX will lend a human being at Mars.
Hmm.
What are the determining factors would you say from an engineering perspective or is that that not the bottlenecks.
I know it's fundamentally your engineering the vehicle.
Starship is the most complex and advanced rocket that's ever been made by.
I know order of magnitude or something like that it's a lot it's really Next Level so
and the fundamental optimization of,
Sasha piz minimizing cost per ton to orbit and ultimately caused proton to the surface of Mars,
this may seem like a Mercantile objective but it is actually the thing that needs to be optimized
like there is a certain cost per time to the surface of Mars where we can afford to establish a self-sustaining City
and and then above that we cannot afford to do it so right now you couldn't fly to Mars four trillion dollars doesn't,
no amount of money could get your ticket to Mars so we need to get that above you know to get that like something that is actually possible at all.
But then but that's that's we don't we don't just want to have you know with Mars flags and Footprints and then not come back for a half century like we did with the moon in order to pass.
Very important to Great filter I think we need to be a multi-planet species this may sound somewhat esoteric to a lot of people but.
I eventually given enough time,
this is something that is likely to experience some Calamity that could be something that humans do to themselves or external event like happened to the dinosaurs and,
but a bit of it eventually,
and if none if none of that happens and somehow magically we keep going then the sun will the Sun is gradually expanding
and will engulf the Earth and probably Earth gets too hot for Life in.
About 500 million years it's a long time but that's only ten percent longer than Earth has been around and so if you think about like the.
The current situation is really remarkable and kind of hard to believe but
that's been around for and a half billion years and this is the first time if 1/2 billion years that has been possible to extend life beyond Earth.
And that window of Charity may be open for a long time and I hope it is but it also may be open for a short time and we shouldn't I think it is wise for us to.
Act quickly while the waiter is open just in case it closes.
The existence of nuclear weapons pandemics all kinds of threats yeah should should kind of.
Give us the motivation I'm your civilization could get could die with a bang or a whimper.
Go if it's a fad I's a demographic collapse then it's more of a whimper obviously but if it's World War 3 is more of a bang but these are all risks are it's important to think of these things and just.
Yeah I think of things like probabilities not certainties those are the probability that something bad will happen at on Earth I'd like I think most likely the future will be good
but there's like let's say for argument's sake
a one percent chance per Century of of a civilization ending event like that was Stephen Hawking's estimate,
I think you might be right about that so then.
You know we should basically.
Think of this like being a multi-planet species is like taking out insurance for life itself like life insurance for life also turned into an infomercial real quick live pictures for Life yes and you know we can bring the creatures
from are plants animals from Earth to Mars and breathe life into the planet and and have a second planet with with life.
That would be great they can't bring themselves their you know so if we don't bring them to Mars then they will just.
For sure all died when the sun expands anyway and then that'll be it,
what do you think is the most difficult aspect of building a civilization on Mars terraforming Mars like from engineering perspective from a financial perspective human perspective to get.
To get a large number of folks there who will never return back to Earth.
No they could certainly return some will return back to Earth they will choose to stay there for the rest of their lives many will
but you know it we,
we need the spaceships back like the ones that go to Mars Freedom back so you can hop on if you want you know it's like but we can't just not have this patients come back with those things are expensive when you divide like to,
come back and forth during the trip I mean do you think about the terraforming aspect like actually build are you so focused right now on the spaceships part that's so critical in tomorrow so we have absolutely if you can't get there nothing else matters so,
and like I said you can't get there with at some extraordinarily high cost I mean the current cost of let's say 1 ton to the surface of Mars is on the order of a billion dollars.
So you don't just need the rocket and launch and everything you need like heat shield you need you know
guidance system 8 deep space Communications you need some kind of Landing system so like rough approximation would be.
A billion dollars per ton to the surface of Mars right now this is obviously.
Way too expensive to create a self-sustaining civilization so we need to improve that by.
At least a factor of a thousand a million per ton yes but ideally less that much less than a million tongue but if it's not like it's got to be.
How much can a society afford to spend or want you to just want to spend on a self-sustaining,
City on Mars the self-sustaining part is important like it's just the key threshold the great the Great voltar,
we'll have been passed when the city on Mars it can survive even if the space ships from Earth stop coming for any reason,
doesn't matter what the reason is but if they stop coming for any reason will it die out or will it not and if there's even one critical ingredient missing then,
still doesn't count it's like
therefore a long sea voyage and you've got everything except vitamin C and it's only a matter of time you know you're gonna die so so we got to get Mars Mars City to the point where it's self-sustaining.
I'm not sure this will really happen in my lifetime but I hope to see it at least have a lot of momentum and and then you could say okay what is the minimum tonnage necessary to
have a self-sustaining City and there's a lot of uncertainty about this you can say like I don't know it's probably at least a million tons.
Because you have to set up a lot of infrastructure on Mars like I said you can't be missing any anything that.
In order to be self-sustaining can't be must like you need a semiconductor Fabs you need,
I know refineries like you need lots of things you know so,
and Mars is not super hospitable it's the least inhospitable Planet but it's definitely a fixer-upper of a planet outside of Earth,
yes the Earth is predicted is like easy yeah and also I should we should clarify in the solar system,
yes in the solar system might be nice like vacation spots there might be some great planets out there but it's awkward
to get there yeah way way way way way too hard to say the least let me push back on that not really a pushback but a quick curveball of a question so you did mention physics as the the first starting point so.
General relativity allows for wormholes.
Are they technically get exist do you think those can ever be leveraged by humans to travel faster than the speed of light.
Well are you saying well the thing is debatable the,
but that we currently do not know of any means of going faster than the speed of light there is like.
There are some ideas about
having space like so so you can only move at the speed of light through space but if you can make space itself move.
But that that's like that that's what warming space space is capable of moving faster than the speed of light right like the universe in The Big Bang Theory of the universe expanded much much more than the speed of light.
By lat yeah so but the.
If this is possible that the amount of energy required to of space is so.
Gigantic it's boggles the mind so although I came down with propulsion how much Innovation is possible with rocket propulsion is this.
I mean you've seen it all and you're constantly innovating in every aspect how much is possible like how much can you get 10x somehow is there something in there in physics that you can get significant Improvement in terms of efficiency of engines and all those kinds of things.
Well as a saying like the really the Holy Grail is a fully and rapidly reusable orbital system so,
right now the Falcon 9 is the only reusable rocket out there that but it but
the booster comes back and lands I'm sure you've seen the videos and we get the nose cone or fairing back but we do not get the Opera stage back so
that means that we have a minimum cost of building up for stage
you can think of like a two-stage rocket of sort of like two airplanes like a big airplane and a small airplane and we get big airplane back but not the smaller airplane
and so it still cost a lot you know so that upper stage is at least 10 million dollars and then the,
degree of the booster is not as we use is not as rapidly and completely as well as we would like in order the fairings so.
You know our kind of minimum marginal cost accounting overhead for per flight is on the order of.
15 to 20 million dollars maybe.
So
that's extremely good for is by far better than any rocket ever in history but.
With full and Rapid reusability we can reduce the cost per ton to orbit by a factor of 100.
But just think of it like like imagine if you had an aircraft or something or a car and if you had to buy a new car every time you went for a drive will be very expensive.
Every silly frankly but.
But you in fact you just refuel the car or recharge the car and that's makes your trip like I don't know a thousand times cheaper so.
It's the same for Rockets
if you very difficult to make this complex machine that can go to orbit and so if you cannot reuse it and after throw even
any part of any significant part of it away that massively increases the cost so
you know Starship in theory could do.
Cost per launch of like a million maybe two million dollars or something like that and and put over 100 tons in orbit.
This is crazy yeah,
so that's incredible so you're saying like it's by far the biggest bang for the Bacchus to make the fully reusable versus like some kind of brilliant breakthrough in theoretical physics
no no there's no there's no problem breaking that there's no I just met you when I throw a career as well as this is an extremely difficult engineering problem,
got no new physics is required,
I just brilliant engineering let me ask a slightly philosophical fun question gotta ask I know you're focused on getting to Mars but once we're there on Mars what do you what form of government economic system,
political system do you think would work best for an early civilization of humans.
I mean the interesting reason to talk about the stuff it also me helps people dream about the future I know you're really focused about the short-term engineering dream but it's like,
I don't know there's something about imagining an actual civilization on Mars that gives people
it's really gives people help what would be a new frontier and an opportunity to rethink the whole nature of government just as was done in the creation of the United States.
So I mean I would suggest.
Having.
Direct democracy like people vote directly on things as opposed to representative democracy so representative democracy I think is to subject to special interest and.
You know coercion of the politicians and that kind of thing so I'd recommend.
That that there's just direct democracy people vote on laws the population votes on laws themselves and then the laws must be short enough that people can understand them.
Yeah and then like keeping a well-informed populist like really being transparent about all the information about what they're voting for absolute transparency,
yeah and not make it as annoying as those cookies we have to accept the trailer exotic rupees I've always liked you know there's like there's like a slight amount of trepidation when you
click accept cookies like I feel as though there's like perhaps like a like a very tiny chance that will open a portal to hell
or something like that that's exactly how I feel why why do they why do they keep it what are you accepting what do they want with this cookie
it's like somebody got upset with accepting cookies or something somewhere over who cares like
so annoying to keep accepting all these cookies me this is just a greater extent yes you can have my damn cookie I don't care whatever you heard it from me I'm first he accepts all your damn cookies yeah it's awesome me Annoying yeah it's a
one example of implementation of a good idea done.
Really horribly yeah it's somebody was like there's some good intentions of like privacy or whatever but now everyone's just has to click accept cookies and it's not.
You know you have billions of people who have to keep clicking accept cookie and super annoying.
Their worst just accept the damn cookie it's fine there is like I think fundamental problem that we're because we've not really had a major.
Like a world war or something like that in a while and obviously we would like to not have World Wars the there's not been a cleansing function for rules and regulations
so always did have some sort of lining in that there would be a
reset on rules and regulations after a war so what was one and two there were huge resets on rules and regulations now as if the site is society does not have a war that the end there's no cleansing function or garbage collection for rules and regulations then rules regulations will accumulate every year
because they're immortal
there's no actual humans die but the lowest aren't so that we need a garbage collection function for rules and regulations that should not just.
Be immortal because some of the rules regulations that are put in place will be counterproductive
I've done with good intentions but counterproductive sometimes not done with good intentions so if you just if rules and regulations just accumulate every year you get more and more of them,
and eventually you won't be able to do anything
you just like Gulliver with you know tied down by thousands of little strings and we see that in you know.
Us and I like like basically all the economies that have been around for a while.
And and regulators and legislators create new rules and regulations every year but they don't put effort into removing them and I think that's very important that we put effort into removing rules and regulations.
Forget stuff because you get special interest that then are dependent on like they have a you know a vested interest in that whatever role regulation and that they they fight to not get it removed.
Yeah so it I mean I guess the problem with the Constitution is it's kind of like sea.
Versus Java because it doesn't have any garbage collection built and I think there should be I when you first said that the the metaphor of garbage collection I love recording software,
for the colonists a yeah it would be interested interesting as the laws themselves Kaneda built in,
thing where they kind of died after a while like somebody explicitly publicly defends them so that's sort of it's not like somebody has to kill them they kind of die themselves.
They disappear yeah.
Not to defend Java or anything but you know C++ you know you could also have gone great garbage collection in Python and so on yeah,
so yeah something something needs to happen or just the civilizations arteries arteries just Harden over time.
And you can just get less and less done because there's just a rule against everything so so I think I don't know for Mars order I'd say we're importing you obviously both as well like I think we should be an active,
process for removing a rules regulations and questioning their existence just.
If we've got a function for creating rules regulations because rules and regulations can also think of as like they're like software or lines of code for our wedding,
civilization that's rules and regulations so it's like we shouldn't have rules regulations but the you have your code accumulation but no card removal.
And so just gets to become basically archaic bloatware after a while and then it's just it makes it hard for it.
Things progressed so I don't make Mars you'd have like a any given law I must have a sunset,
you know and and and require active.
Voting to give resorting to keep it up there you know and I should also say like these just I don't know recommendations of thoughts and.
Ultimately it will be up to the people on Mars to decide but I think it should be easier to.
Remove a lower than to add one because of the just to overcome the inertia of laws so maybe it's like,
for God's sake you need likes a 60% vote to have a law take effect but only a 40 percent vote to remove it.
So let me be the guy you post a meme on Twitter recently where there's the there's like a row of urinals,
that guy just walks all the way across and he tells you about crypto so this is I mean that's how to read
so many times I think maybe even literally yeah do you think technologically speaking there's any room for ideas of smart contracts or so on because you mentioned laws
that's an interesting Implement use of things like smart contracts to implement the laws by which governments function.
Like something built on a theory more maybe
a dog coin that enables smart contract somehow.
I don't quite understand this whole smart Contracting you know.
I mean so it's too dumb times have small contracts good line I mean my general approach to any kind of like
deal or whatever is just make sure this Clarity of understanding
that's the most important thing and and just keep any kind of deal very short and simple plain language.
And just make sure everyone understands this is the deal that everyone is a clear and.
And what are the consequences if first things don't happen but usually deals are.
Are business deals or whatever are way too long and complex and overly layered and pointlessly.
You mentioned that doge is the people's coin yeah and you said that you are literally going SpaceX may consider literally putting.
Dogecoin on the moon is this something you're still considering Mars perhaps.
Do you think there's some chance we've talked about political systems on Mars that Dogecoin is the official currency of Mars at some time in the future well,
I think Mars is awful,
need to have a different currency because you can't synchronize do to speed of light or not easily so must be complete Standalone from Earth.
Well yeah because the.
Mars is at closest approach is for light minutes away roughly and then at first approach it's roughly 20 light minutes away maybe a little more so you can't really have a something synchronizing
you know if you could if you got a 20 minutes to be light issue if it's got a one minute blockchain it's not going to synchronize probably.
So my husband would,
I don't know if monster have a cryptocurrency is thing but probably seems likely but it would be some kind of localized thing on Mars.
And you let the people decide.
Yeah absolutely this is the future of our should be up to the Martians yeah so.
But I think the cryptocurrency thing is an interesting approach to reducing the.
Error in the database that is called money.
Yeah I think I have a pretty deep understanding of the of what money actually is on a practical day-to-day basis because of PayPal.
You know we really got in deep there.
And right now the money system actually for practical purposes is is is really a bunch of heterogeneous mainframes running old Coble.
Okay you mean literally that's literally literally what's happening in batch mode.
Okay patch mode yeah pretty the poor bastards who have to maintain that code okay that's it.
As a painter that's pain not even for Transco Mall yep it's kobol,
and they so banks are still buying made friends in 2021 and running
engine COBOL code and you know the Federal Reserve is like probably even older than the but what the banks have and they have an old Coble Mainframe
and so now that and and so the with the government effectively has editing privileges on the on the money database.
And they use those editing privileges to make more money whenever they want,
and this increases the error in the database that is money so if I think money should really be viewed through the lens of information Theory,
and and so it's
you're kind of like like an internet connection like what's the bandwidth you know total bitrate what is the latency Jetter packet drop you no errors the errors and Network,
communication so that money like that basically I think that's probably right where you think but and and then say what what system,
information Theory standpoint allows an economy to function the best and.
You know crypto is an attempt to reduce the error in.
In money that is contributed by governments diluting the money supply as basically a pernicious for initial form of Taxation.
So both policy in terms of with inflation and actual like technological Cobalt.
Bikes are just think of money as information people often will think of money as having power in and of itself,
it does not it money is information and it does not have power in and of itself,
like the again applying the physics tools of thinking about things in the limit but helpful if you are stranded on a tropical island and.
You have a trillion dollars so useless.
If you're stranded on a desert island with no food you all the Bitcoin in the world well.
Not stop you from starving yeah so
so I could just think of money as as a.
Database for resource allocation across time and space
and and then what what what system.
It is what in what form should that that database or data system.
What would be most effective now that there's a there is a fundamental issue with say Bitcoin its current form in that it's the transaction volume is very limited.
And the,
latency if the latency for probably confirm transaction is too is too long much longer than you'd like so it's not
it's actually not great from transaction volume standpoint or latency standpoint so it is perhaps useful as.
To search to solve an aspect of the money database problem,
which is the sort of store of wealth or an accounting of relative obligations I suppose but it is not useful as a.
Currency as a day-to-day currency
the people have proposed different technological solutions lightning he had lightning Network in the layer 2 Technologies on top of that it's all it seems to be all kind of a trade-off
but the point is it's kind of brilliant to say that just think about it information think about what kind of database will kind of infrastructure enables that exchange like you're operating in economy
and you need to have some thing that allows for the efficient to have efficient
value ratios between products and services so you got this massive number of products and services a need to you can't just barge barter just like that would be extremely unwieldy so you need something that gives you,
the.
Ratio of exchange between goods and services and and then I just something that allows you to shift obligations across time like that debt and Equity shift obligations across time,
what does what does the best job of that pod reason why I think there's some,
merits Dogecoin even though it was obviously created as a joke is that.
It actually does have a much higher transaction volume capability than Bitcoin
and the the cut the costs of doing a transaction that the the doors quite fee is very low
like right now if you want to do it a Bitcoin transaction the price of doing that transaction is very high so you could not use it effectively for most things and in or could it even scale to a high volume.
And we're recording was you know started I guess one round 2008 or something like that the internet connections were much worse than they are today like order of magnitude
I mean there's the way way worse you know it in 2008 so so like having us you know small
block size or whatever it is you know and and along.
Synchronization time is made sense in 2008 but you know 2021 or fast forward 10 years it's like it's it's like a comically low you know it's a
so
And I think there's some value to having a linear increase in the amount of currency that is generated.
So because I'm out of the currency you'd like if a car if a currency is to deflation Airy or like or should say if if if if a currency is expected to increase in value over time there's a reluctance to spend it.
Because he like oh I fi I'll just hold it and not spend it because it's scarcity is increasing with time so if I spent it now then I will regret spending it's odd we'll just you know total it but if there's.
Some dilution of the currency occurring over time that's that's more of an incentive to use that as a currency so those quench someone randomly has a.
Just a fixed a number of sort of coins or hash strings that.
I generate every year so this this some inflation but it's not a percentage based it so that the it's a fixed number so the percentage of inflation would necessarily decline over time.
So it just out of I'm not saying that it's like the ideal system for a currency but I think it actually is just fundamentally better than.
Anything else I've seen just by accident so I like how you said around 2008 so you're not.
You know some people suggest that you might be Satoshi Nakamoto your previous said you're not you're not for sure would you tell us if you are yeah okay,
do you think it's a feature of bug that he's anonymous or she or they.
It's an interesting kind of cork of human history that there is a particular technology that is a completely Anonymous inventor.
Creator.
Well I'm you can you can look at the evolution of ideas.
Before the launch of Bitcoin and see who wrote.
You know about those ideas.
And then I like I don't know exactly but I don't know who created bitcoin for practical purposes but
the evolution of ideas is pretty clear for that and like it seems as though like Nick Szabo probably
more than anyone else responsible for the evolution of those ideas so he claims not to be some Cuts Nakamoto but.
I'm not sure that's that's neither here nor there but he seems to be the one more responsible for the ideas behind the coin there anyone else.
So it's not perhaps like singular figures aren't even as important as the figures involved in the evolution of ideas that led tell thing so yeah yeah they do.
Most perhaps it's sad to think about history but maybe most names will be forgotten anyway what is the name anyway it's a name name attached to an idea.
What does it even mean really I think Shakespeare had a thing about roses and stuff whatever he said rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
I got you on the quote Shakespeare I feel I feel like I accomplished something today shall I compare thee to a summers day
clip that out that's more temperate and Welfare autopilot.
Testimony.
Does lot of pile has been through an incredible journey over the past six years or perhaps even longer in the minds of in your mind in the minds of many involved
I think that's what we're supposed to like
connected really was that what a pile of stuff autonomy and I see the whole journey is incredible to me to watch I was.
Because I knew
well part of his I was at MIT and I knew the difficulty of computer vision yeah and I knew the whole I had a lot of colleagues and friends about the DARPA Challenge and you how difficult it is and so there was a natural skepticism when I first drove a Tesla with,
the initial system based on mobile I yeah I thought there's no way the first one I I didn't I thought there's no way this car could maintain.
Like stay in lane and create a comfortable experience so my intuition initially was that the lane keeping problem is way too difficult to solve - yeah that's relatively easy is yeah like but not this,
but solve in the way that we just we talked about previous this prototype versus a thing.
That actually creates a pleasant experience over hundreds of thousands of miles or Millions yeah so we had to wrap a lot of code around the mobile I think it's doesn't just work by itself
I mean there's part that's part of the story of how you approach things sometimes sometimes you do things from scratch sometimes the first
you kind of see what's out there and then you decide to from scratch that was one of the boldest decisions I've seen is both on the hardware and the software decide to eventually go from scratch,
I thought again I was skeptical but that's going to be able to work out because it's such a difficult problem and so it was an incredible journey when I see now with.
Everything the hardware of the compute the sensors the things,
maybe care and love about most is the the stuff that Andre capacities leading with the data set selection the whole data engine process the neural network architectures the way that's in the real world.
That network is tested validated all the different test sets
you know versus the imagenet model of computer vision like what's in Academia is like real world artificial intelligence so under his awesome and obviously plays an important role but we have a.
A lot of really talented people driving things so and Ashok is actually the head of autopilot engineering
Andres should director of AI stuff yeah so yeah there's I'm aware that there's an incredible team of just a lot going on yeah just you know these people pure will give up will give me too much credit and they'll give it under too much credit so and
people should realize how much is going on under the yeah so a lot of really talented people the Tesla autopilot i-team is,
extremely talented it's like some of the smartest people in the world,
so yeah we're getting it done what are some insights you've gained over those.
56 years of autopilot about the problem of autonomous driving so you leaped in.
Having some sort of first principles kinds of intuitions but nobody knows how difficult the.
Like I thought the self-driving problem would be hard but it was harder than I thought so like I thought it'd be easy a story very hard but it was actually harder than
than even that so I what it comes down to at the end of the day is just hopes of driving you have to solve.
You have you basically need to recreate.
What you what humans do to drive which is humans drive with Optical senses eyes and biological neural Nets.
And so in order to that that's how the entire Road system is designed to work with with a basically passive Optical and neural Nets.
It biologically and now that we need to so far actually for full self driving to work we have to recreate that in digital form so we have to
that that means cameras with Advanced neural Nets and silicon form,
and then you it will obviously solve for for self-driving that's the only way I don't think there's any other way but the question is what aspects of human nature do you have to encode into the machine right so you have to solve the perception problem like detect.
And then you first while realize
what is the perception problem for driving like all the kinds of things you have to be able to see like what do we even look at when we drive there's a just
recently heard Andre talked about it a mighty about car doors I think it was the world's greatest talk of all time about car doors yeah the the you know
the fine details of corridors like what is even an open car door man so like the the ontology of that
that's a perception problem we human solve that perception problem and Tesla has to solve that problem and then there's the control in the planning coupled with the perception you have to figure out like.
What's involved in driving like especially in all the different edge cases and then I mean maybe you can comment on this,
how much game-theoretic kind of stuff needs to be involved you know at a four-way stop sign you know are as humans when we drive our actions affect the world.
Sure he changes how others behave most autonomous driving if you.
You're usually just responding to the scene as opposed to like really asserting yourself in the scene do you think I think there's so I think I think these could be sort of control control logic
conundrums are not are not the hard part the you know let's see.
What do you think is the hard part of in this whole beautiful complex problem so it's a lot of freaking software man a lot of smart lines of code for sure in order to have.
Create an accurate Vector space so.
Like you've you're coming from image space which is like this this flow of photons cut you're going to camera cameras and and then since you have this massive bitstream
image space and then you have to.
Effectively compress the massive bitstream.
Corresponding to photons that,
knocked off an electron and camera sensor and it turned that put stream into into Vector space I've Bike by Vector space I mean like,
I
yeah you've got cars and and humans and Lane lines and curves and
traffic lights and that kind of thing once you have an accurate Vector space the control problem is similar to that of a video game like a Grand Theft Auto of cyberpunk
if you have accurate accurate best Vector space it's the control problem is its I wouldn't say it's trivial it's not trivial but it's.
But it's not like some.
It's a mountable thing it's but having accurate Vector space is very difficult yeah I think we humans don't give enough respect to how incredible human perception system is to mapping the Raw.
Photons to the vector space representation in our heads your brain is doing it an incredible amount of processing.
And giving you an image that is a very cleaned up image like when we look around here we seek like you see color in the corners of your eyes but actually your eyes have very few cones like a cone receptors in the peripheral vision
you look your eyes are painting color in the peripheral vision you don't realize it but their eyes are actually.
Painting color and your eyes are also have like this blood vessels and all sorts of gnarly things and there's a blind spot to produce your blind spot.
No you can your praise painting in the missing.
The blind spot you going to do these like these things online where you look here and look at this point and then look at this point and it's.
If it's in your blind spot it that your brain will just fill in the.
The missing vessel the peripheral vision Circle yes you realize all the Illusions provision science and so it makes you realize just how incredible the brain is the raised during crazy amount of post processing on the vision signals from your eyes it's insane,
so
and then even once you get all those fish and signals your your brain is constantly trying to figure to forget as much as possible so here in memory is.
Perhaps the weakest thing about the brain is memory so because memory is,
so expensive to a brain and so limited your brain is trying to forget as much as possible and distill.
The things that you see into the smallest smallest amounts of information possible so your brain is trying to not just get to a vector space but get to a vector space that is the smallest possible Vector space of only relevant objects.
And I think like you can sort of look inside your brain or least I can like when you drive down the road and and try to.
Think about what your brain is actually doing consciously and it's constant it's it's it's like,
you'll see a car that you could because you're not have cameras you I don't have eyes in the back of your head or side you know so you say like your basically your head is like a you know basically have like two cameras on a slow gimbal.
And what's you and I said something great okay you and I is a you know like at people constantly distracted and thinking about things and texting and
drink also saying they shouldn't do in the car changing the radio station so
having arguments you know is like so
so like so like like,
like when's the last time you look right and left and you know or and rare word or even diagonally you know forward to actually refresh your vector space.
So you're glancing around and what your mind is doing is is is trying to still relevant vectors basically objects with a position and motion and.
And then and then editing that down to the least amount that that's necessary for you to drive.
It does seem to be able to edit it down or compress even further into things like concept so it's not it's like it goes beyond human mind seems to go
sometimes Beyond Vector space to sort of space of Concepts
Tory you'll see a thing it's no longer represented spatially somehow it's almost like a concept that you should be aware of like if this is a school zone you'll remember that yeah as a concept,
which is a weird thing to represent but perhaps for driving you don't.
Need to fully represent those things or maybe you get those kind of well you indirectly you need it's like a stylish Vector space and then.
Actually have predictions for that about those Vector spaces so like you know like if.
You know like you drive past say a bus and the and you see that this those people
before you drove past the bus useful people crossing the other side like or some just imagine there's like a large truck or something blocking site but you before you came out of the truck you saw that there were some kids about to cross the road
in front of the truck now you can no longer see the kids,
but you you need to be able to but you would no no okay those kids are probably going to pass by the truck and cross the road even though you cannot see them so you have to have.
Memory.
Yet need to remember the little kids there and you need to have some forward prediction of what their Position will be really hard but I'm irrelevant so with occlusions.
And computer vision when you can't see an object anymore even when just walks behind a tree and reappears that's a really really
I mean at least in academic literature its tracking through occlusions it's very difficult yeah we're doing it
engine in this yeah so some of its object permanence like same thing happens with the humans with your neural Nets like wearing like a toddler grows up like there's a point in time where.
They develop they have a sense of object permanence so before certain age if you have a ball.
Or toy or whatever and you put it behind your back and you pop it out if they don't before they have object permanence it's like a new thing every time it's like whoa.
Pretoria went poof disappeared and now it's back again and I can't believe it and that they can play peek-a-boo all day long because peekaboo is fresh every time but then we figured our object permanence then they realize oh no the object is not gone it's just behind your back.
Sometimes I wish we never did figure out for her - yeah so that's a.
That's an important problem to solve yes so and like an important evolution of the neural Nets in the car is.
Memory I caught memory across both time and space so now you can't remember.
Like you have to say like how long do you want to remember things for and and it's there's there's a cost to remembering things for a long time so you could you you know like run out of memory to try to remember too much for too long,
and then you also have things that are stale if they're trick remember for too long and then you also need things that are member remembered over time so even,
if you like say have like.
Programs Take 5 Seconds of memory on a Time basis but like let's say you your product at a light and you and you saw use a pedestrian example that people were waiting to crush the.
Across the road and you can't you can't quite see them because I'm going to clusion but they might wait for a minute before the light changes will for them to cross the road you still need to remember that they had that that's where they were,
and that they're probably going to Crossroad type of thing so even if that exceeds your.
Your time based memory should not exceed your space memory
and I just think the data engine side of that so getting the data to learn all the concepts that you're saying now is an incredible process it's this iterative process of
it's this is hydrogen atom many passionate we're changing the name to something else okay I'm sure the equally as yeah Rick and Morty like a lot of
yeah we've we architected the neural net
your lesson the cars so many times it's crazy also every time there's a new major version you'll rename it to something more ridiculous or or memorable and beautiful say not ridiculous of course
if you see the full before like a ray of neural Nets that they're operating the car it's kind of boggles the Mind
there's so many layers it's crazy so.
Yeah but and we started off with a simple neural Nets that were.
Basically,
image recognition on a single frame from a single camera and then trying to knit those together with,
it with see I should say we're really primarily running see here because C++ is too much overhead and we have our own C compiler.
So to get maximum performance we actually,
rotor and C compiler and or continue to optimize our C compiler for maximum efficiency in fact we've just recently
done a new rival on a c compiler that will compile directly to our autopilot Hardware you want to compile the whole thing down and with your own compiler
yeah like so officially here because there's all kinds of computer CPU GPU there's like the basic types of things that you have to somehow figure out the scheduling across all of those things and so you're compiling the code down yeah it does all okay this is
so that's why there's a lot of people involved there's there's a lot of Hardcore software engineering at a very sort of,
bare metal level because we're trying to do a lot of compute that's constrained to the.
You know are for surviving computer so and we want to try to have the highest frames per second possible.
We really put a lot of effort into the efficiency of our compute and and so there's actually a lot of work done by.
It's very talented software engineers at Tesla that.
At a very foundational level to improve the efficiency of compute and how we use the trip accelerators which are basically.
Don't know doing Matrix math but dot products like a Brazilian dot products.
It's like what are your lights it's like computer wise like 99% dot product so,
you know and you want to achieve as many high frame rates like a video game you want yeah for resolution higher frame rate high frame rate low latency,
low Jitter so.
I think one of the things were moving towards now is no post processing of the image through the,
the image signal processor so like for what happens for cameras is that almost all cameras is they.
There's a lot of post processing done in order to make pictures look pretty,
and so we don't care about pictures looking pretty we just want the data we're so we're moving just roll Photon counts so the system will like the image that.
That the computer sees is actually much more than what.
Each see if you represented on a camera that's got much more data and even in very low light conditions you can see that there's a small Photon counter front between
you know the spot here and that's what they're which means that so it can see in the dark incredibly well because it can detect these tiny differences in photon counts.
Much better than you could possibly imagine so and then we also save 13 milliseconds on a latency so.
From removing the post processing and the image yes yeah it's like because we've got eight cameras and then there's.
Roughly I don't know 1/2 milliseconds or so we 1.6 milliseconds of latency for each camera and so like.
Going to just it basically by passing the image processor
get us back 13 milliseconds of latency which is important and we tracked leads you away from you no Photon hits the camera too,
you know all the stuff that has got to go through to get it go through the various neural Nets and the C code and add and there's a little bit of C++ there as well.
Fucking maybe a lot but it the core stuff is that heavy-duty computer sold in C and.
And so we track that latency all the way to an output command to the Drive Unit to accelerate the brakes to slow down steering.
Here turn left or right so because you're going to Output a command that's going to go to a controller and like some of these controllers have an update frequency that's maybe 10 Hertz or something like that which is slow that's like now you lose 100 milliseconds potentially,
so so then we went to update the.
The drivers on the Lexus steering and braking control to have
more like 100 Hertz the third 10 Hertz and you're going to 10 millisecond latency instead of 100 milliseconds worst case latency and actually Jitter is more of a challenge than latency could latency is like you can you can you can anticipate and predict but if you but if you've got a stack up of things going from the camera to the to the computer
through then a series of other computers and finally to an actuator on the car if you have a stack up of
of tolerances of timing tolerances then you can have quite a variable latency which is called gender and and that makes it.
Hard to to anticipate exactly what how you should turn the car accelerate because if you got maybe.
150 Turner milliseconds of Jitter then you could be off by a two point two seconds and it's going to make this could make a big difference so yes the interpolate some Hall to test to deal with the effects of Jitter so you did they can make like.
Robust control decisions.
So the Jitter is in the sensor information or is it the Jitter can occur at any stage in the pipeline you can if you have just if you have fixed latency you can anticipate,
and and up like say okay we know that our information is for argument sake 150 milliseconds Dale.
Like so 450 500 second 150 milliseconds from Photon s camera two.
Um where you can measure a change in the acceleration of the vehicle.
So then then you can say okay well we're going to enter we know it's our 40 milliseconds so we're going to take that into account and.
Compensate for that latency however if you've got then 130 milliseconds of latency plus 100 milliseconds of Jitter that switch could be anywhere from 0 0 to 100 most motorcycles on top so then your latency could be from 150 to 250 milliseconds I got 100 milliseconds that you don't know what to do with,
that's basically random so getting rid of Jitter is extremely important.
And that affects your control decisions and all those kinds of things okay yeah the cars is going to fundamentally maneuver better with larger at the cause will burn over with superhuman ability and reaction time much faster than a human.
I mean I think over time the tell them what a pilot for so driving will be capable of Maneuvers that you know.
You know are far more than what like James Bond could do and like the best movie everything that's exactly what I was imagining my mind as you said it's like an impossible Maneuvers that a human couldn't do you know so.
Well let me ask sort of looking back the six years looking out into the future based on your current understanding how hard do you think this this full self-driving problem when do you think Tesla will solve level for FSD.
It's looking quite likely that it will be next year.
And what is the solution look like is it the current pool of FSD beta candidates,
they start getting greater and greater as they have been degrees of autonomy and then there's a certain level Beyond which they can they can do their own they can read a book.
Yeah so I mean you can see anybody who's been following the.
For so driving beta closely will see that the the rate of just engagements has been dropping rapidly,
so like it is engagement be where it where the driver intervenes to prevent the car from doing something dangerous potentially so.
So that the interventions you know per million miles has been dropping dramatically at some point the.
And that Trend looks like it happens next year is that the probability of an accident on FSD is.
Less than that of the average human and then and then significantly less than that of the average human so.
It's only appears like we will get there next year.
But then of course that that then there's going to be a case okay we now have to prove this to regulators and prove it to you know and we want to standard that is not just equivalent to a human but.
Much better than the average human I think it's got to be at least two or three times higher safety than a human so two or three times lower probability of injury than a human,
before before we would actually say like okay it's okay to go it's not going to be a cool it's going to be much better so you look 10 point F SD.
10.6 just came out recently 10.7 is on the way maybe 11 is on the way so we're in the future yeah we were hoping to get 11 out this year but it's.
11 actually has a whole bunch of fundamental rewrites on the neural net architecture.
And some fundamental improvements in creating Vector space.
So there is a some fundamental like leap that really deserves the 11 I mean it's a pretty cool number yeah
Levin would be a single stack for all you know one stack to rule them all and but they're they're just some really fundamental,
much more capability but Vic but you know at first they're going to have issues so like we have this working on like sort of alpha software and it's good but it's.
It's basically taking a whole bunch of C C++ code and and and leading a massive number amount of C++ code and replacing it with a neural net and Andre makes this point a lot which is like neural Nets a kind of eating software.
You know over time there's like less and less conventional software more and more neural net we were just all software but it's still comes out to line software but let's it's more vulnerable net stuff and less,
you know heuristics basically if you're more Matrix based stuff and less.
Rustic spaced stuff
and.
You know like like one of the big changes will be like right now the neural Nets will.
Deliver it dried bag of points to the C++ or C and C++ code yeah we called the giant bag of points yeah and it's like so you got a pixel and and and.
Something associated with that pixel like this pixel is probably car pixel is probably landline then you've got to assemble this giant bag of points in the C code and turn it into vectors.
And we're does a pretty good job of it but it's it's a it's.
If we want to just we need another layer of neural Nets on top of that to take the giant bag of points and distill that down too.
Vector space in the neural net part of the software as opposed to the heuristics part of the software,
this is a big Improvement you know and that's all the way down so what you want it's not even your own your own this but it's,
this will be just a game this is a game changer to not have the bag of points giant bag of points that has to be assembled with
many lines of C++ and and have the have a neural net just assemble those into a vector so that the neural net is outputting.
Much much less data it's outputting this this is a landline this is a curb this is drivable space this is a card this is you know a pedestrian or cyclist or something like that it's outputting.
It's really about putting proper vectors to the Tsetse flies first control control code as opposed to.
Sort of constructing the vectors in C.
Rude and I think quite a good job of but it's a group kind of hitting a local maximum on the how well this you can do this.
So this is this is really this is really a big deal,
and just all of the networks in the car needs to move to surround video this awesome Legacy networks that are not surround video
and all of the training is to move to surround video and the efficiency of the training needs to get better and it is and then we need to move everything to Raw.
Photon counts as opposed to processed images.
Which is quite a big reset on the training because the system is trained on post processed image images so we need to redo all the training to train against the the raw Photon accounts instead of the post processed image,
so ultimately it's kind of reducing the complexity of the whole thing so reducing reducing lines of code will actually go lower and that's fascinating.
So you doing Fusion while the sensors are reducing the complexity of having to deal with these digital cameras is like a really right yes,
same with humans yeah OG I guess we got yours too okay yeah well actually need to incorporate sound as well because you know you need like listen for
ambulance siren so far you know fire trucks put you know somebody like.
You know yelling at you as a no just this there's a little bit of audio that needs to be incorporated as well Danica Patrick yeah it was the trolls take a break okay.
Honestly frankly like the ideas are the easy thing and the implementation is the hard thing like the idea of going to the Moon
is the easy part not going to the motor is the hard part and there's a lot of like hardcore engineering that's got to get done at the hardware and software level
likes it optimizing the C compiler and just you know.
Cutting out latency everywhere like this is.
If you don't do this this isn't we're not work properly so the work of the engineers doing this they are like the unsung heroes to some you know but they are critical to the success of the situation.
I think you made it clear I mean at least to me is super exciting every that's going on outside of what Andres doing yeah just the whole infrastructure of the software.
I mean everything is going on with data engine whatever whatever it's called the whole process is it's just yeah like a bar but the sheer scale of it is
boggles the mind like the training at the amount of work done with like we're doing all this custom software for training and labeling.
And do auto-leveling auto-leveling is essential.
Because especially when you got like surround video it's very difficult to like label surround video from scratch is extremely difficult.
Like take a human's such a long time to even label one video clip like several hours or the order labeler.
Basically we're just apply a like heavy duty.
I like a lot of compute to the to the video clips to pre-assign.
And guess what all the things are that are going on in this round video and then there's like correcting it yeah and then all the human has to do is like
tweet like say that you know Chata just what is incorrect this this is like increase increases productivity by effect 100 or more yeah
so you've presented Tesla bot as primarily useful in the factory first of all I think humanoid robots are incredible from a fan of Robotics I think the Elegance of movement that human,
humanoid robots the bipedal robots
show I just so cool so it's really interesting that you're working on this and also talking about applying the same kind of all day ideas of some of which we've talked about with data engine all the
things that were talking about what
does autopilot just transferring that over to the just yet another robotic problem I have to ask since I care about human robot interaction so the human side of that
so you've talked about mostly in the factory do you see it also DC's part of this problem that Tesla but has to solve is interacting with humans and potentially having a place like in the home.
So interactive not just sure not replacing labor but also like I don't know well I think your friend or an assist yeah I think the possibilities are endless.
Yeah it's obviously like a it's a quite an in Tesla's primary Mission direction of accelerating sustainable energy but,
it is a extremely useful thing that we can do for the world which is to make a useful humanoid robot that is capable of
interacting with the world and.
Helping and in many different ways so saline in fact reason I really just just I mean I think if you say like.
Extrapolate to you know many years in the future it's like I think work will become optional so.
Like this lot of jobs that if you're if you're if you're weren't paid to do it they they wouldn't do it like it's not it's not fun you know necessarily like if you're washing dishes all day it's like you know even if you really like washing dishes you really want to do it for eight hours
today every day are probably not so.
And then there's like dangerous work and basically if it's dangerous boring has like potential for repetitive stress injury that kind of thing then that's really where,
humanoid robots would add the most value initially so that's,
we're aiming for is to for the humanoid robots to do drop the people don't voluntarily want to do.
And then we'll have to pair that obviously with some kind of universal basic income and future so I think.
Do you see a world when there's like hundreds of millions of Tesla Bots doing different performing different tasks throughout the world.
Yeah I haven't really thought about it that far into the future but I guess that there may be something like that so.
Jessica wild question so the number of Tesla cars has been accelerating it has been close to 2 million produced many of them have autopilot I think we're over 2 million now.
Do you think there will ever be a time when there will be more Tesla Bots than Tesla cars.
Yeah I actually is as far as your subscription because normally I do try to think I've pretty far into the future but I haven't really thought that far into the future with the.
Tesla pot or it's coordinated Optimist I hope I called octopus subprime because let's not so like a giant you know transformer robot so.
But it's meant to be a general purpose help helpful robot.
And and basically like the things that we're basically like Tessa I think is the has the most advanced real-world a,
for interacting with the real world which were developed as a function of H to make self-driving work and so,
along with custom hardware and like a lot of you know hardcore low-level software to have it run efficiently and be power efficient because it gives you know it's one thing to do neural Nets if you got a gigantic server room with 10,000 computers but now
let's say you just,
you have to now just all that down into one computer that's running at low power in a humanoid robot or a car that's actually very difficult and a lot of hard core soft work is required for that
so so since we're kind of like solving the navigate the real world
with neural Nets problem for.
Cars which are kind of robots with four wheels then it's like kind of a natural extension of that is to put it in a robot with arms and legs.
Actuators so.
Like the to like hard things are like you based need to make the.
How the robot be intelligent enough to interact in a sensible way with the environment.
So it's a real real world Ai and you need to be very good at
manufacturing which is a very hard problem tells us very good manufacturing and also has the real world AI so making the humanoid robot work is basically it means developing,
Custom Motors and sensors.
That that are different font car would use but we're also we have.
I think we're about that the best expertise in developing Advanced electric motors and Power Electronics so it just has to be for humanoid robot application out of car,
still you do talk about love sometimes so let me ask this isn't like for like sex robots or something I love is the answer,
yes.
There is something compelling to us not compelling but we connect with humanoid robots or even legged robots like with the dog and shapes the dogs.
It just it seems like you know there's a huge amount of loneliness in this world.
All of us seek companionship and with other humans friendship and all those kinds of things with a lot of here in Austin a lot of people have dogs so there seems to be a huge opportunity to also have robots that decrease.
The the the amount of loneliness in the world or help us humans connect with each with each other.
So in a way that dogs can do you think about that with us about at all or is it really focused on the problem of Performing specific tasks not connecting with humans.
Um
I mean to be honest I have not actually thought about it from the companionship standpoint but I think it actually would end up being it could be actually a very good companion,
and it could you develop it like a personality.
Overtime that is that is like unique like you know it's not like they're just all the robots are the same and that personality could evolve to be you know.
Match match the the the owner or the you know yes.
The owner well whatever you want to call it the other companion half right in the same way that friends do see I think there's a huge opportunity I think ya know if that's interesting like.
Because you know like this
Japanese phrase I like the wild Wasabi you know the subtle imperfections are what make something special and subtle imperfections of the personality of the robot
map to to the subtle imperfections of the robots human.
Friend don't know owner sounds like maybe the wrong word but.
Could actually make an incredible buddy basically and in that way the imperfect R2D2 or like C-3PO sort of thing you know so from a machine learning perspective.
I think the flaws
being a feature is really nice you could be quite terrible at being a robot for quite a while in the general home environment are all the in general world and that's kind of
adorable and that's like those of your flaws and you fall in love with those flaws so it's in that is very very different than autonomous driving where it's a very high-stakes environment you cannot mess up and so this yeah it's more fun to be a robot
in the home in fact if you think of like C-3PO and R2-D2 yeah like they actually had a lot of like flaws and Imperfections and silly things and,
third argue with each other and what they actually good at doing anything I'm not exactly sure I definitely added a lot to the story.
But but but there's they're sort of quirky elements and.
You know that they would like make mistakes and do things like it was like it made them
relatable I don't know.
And during so so yeah I think that could be something that probably would happen.
But I are initial focus is just to make it useful so so.
I'm confident we'll get it done I'm not sure what the exact timeframe is but like we're probably have I don't know a decent prototype towards the end of next year or something like that.
And it's cool that it's connected to Tesla car,
the so so yeah it's using a lot of you know it would use the autopilot in first computer and
a lot of the training that we've done for the four cars in terms of recognizing real world things could be applied directly to the,
the robot so it but there's there's a lot of custom actuators and sensors that need to be developed,
and an extra module on top of the vector space for love yeah that's me saying okay that's the car too.
That's true.
That could be useful in all environments like you said a lot of people argue in the car so maybe we can help him out you're a student of History fan of Dan Carlin's Hardcore History Podcast yeah that's great
greatest podcast ever yeah I think it is actually it almost doesn't really count as a pot yeah so it's more like a audiobook
yeah so you were on the podcast with dad just had a chat with them about it.
He said you guys want military and all that kind of stuff yeah it's actually it was basically.
It should be titled engineer Wars essentially like when there's a rapid change in the rate of Technology then engineering plays a pivotal role in Victory in battle.
Do you get how far in back in history did you go to go WWII those roasted well it was supposed to be a deep dive on Fighters and bomber.
Technology in World War Two but that ended up being more wide-ranging than that because I just went down the total round hole of like.
Studying all of the fighters and bombers WWII and like the constant rock-paper-scissors game that like you know
one country make this plan that I make it plain to beat that and that's part of a plan to be bad and then they and really what matters like the pace of innovation and also access to high quality Fuel and raw materials.
So like Journey had like some amazing designs but they couldn't make them because they couldn't get the raw materials and,
they had a real problem with the oil and fuel basically the fuel quality was extremely variable so the design was in the bottleneck because that yeah like if the US had Kick-Ass fuel
that was like very consistent like the prize if you make a very high performance aircraft engine in order to make high performance you have to the
the.
The fuel the aviation gas has to be a consistent mixture and it has a high octane.
Like high octane is the most important thing but also can't have like impurities and stuff because you'll follow up the engine,
and a German just never had good excess oil like they try to get it by invading the caucuses but that didn't work too well that never works well,
that's that's for you,
so the oysters Germany was always struggling with shit with basically showed a while and then they could not they couldn't count on a on high quality fuel for their aircraft so that at all they have all these additives and and stuff so.
Whereas the US had awesome Fuel and that provided that to Britain as well so that allowed the British and the Americans to design aircraft engines that were super high performance better than anything else in the world.
Jimmy could design the engine so I just didn't have the fuel and then also the right likes that the quality of the aluminum Alloys that they were getting was also not that great and so did you,
is this like the you talked about all this with Den yep awesome broadly looking at history when you look at Jenkins Khan when you look at
Stalin Hitler the darkest moments of human history what do you take away from those moments does it help you gain insight about human nature about human behavior today.
Whether it's the wars or the individuals or just the behavior of people any aspects of History.
I'm just a lot of incredible things that have been done good and bad that they.
Help yourself you understand the nature of civilization and individuals and.
Does it make you sad that humans do these kinds of things to each other you look at the 20th century World War Two.
The cruelty of the abuse of power talk about communism Marxism installing um,
thanks Duke I mean if you like there's a lot of human history but most of it is actually people just getting on with their lives you know and it's not like human history is just.
What non-stop war and disaster is it those are actually just those intermittent and rare and if they weren't then you know humans would soon cease to exist.
But it does just that Wars tend to be written about a lot and where it's like.
Something being like will a normal year where nothing major happened was just give it about much but that's you know most people just like farming and kind of like living their life you know.
Very villager somewhere at every now and again there's a war and I think so.
And I'm still like that there aren't very many books that I wear I just had to stop reading because it was just too,
too dark but the book about Stalin the court of the reds are.
I could add start reading it was just too too bad dark rough yeah the 30s.
There's a lot of lessons that are to me in particular that it feels like.
Humans like all of us have that is the old Soldier needs in line
that the line between good and evil runs through the heart of every man that all of us are capable of evil all of us are capable of good it's almost like this kind of responsibility that all of us have to
to tend towards the good and so like to me looking at history is almost like an example of look you have some charismatic leader.
That convinces you of things too easy.
Based on that story to do evil onto each other on to your family and to other others and so it's like our responsibility to do good.
It's not like now somehow different from history that can happen again all the can happen again.
And yes most of the time you're right I mean the optimistic view here is mostly people just living life and as you've,
often memed about the quality of life was way worse back in the day and keeps improving over time through Innovation to technology but still somehow notable that these.
Blimps of atrocities happen sir
yeah I mean life was really tough
most of history I mean but for most of human history
Goodyear would be one where not that many people in your village died of the plague starvation
freezing to death or being killed by a neighboring Village it's like well it wasn't that bad yeah it was only like you know we lost 5% this year that was a good year you know that would be par for the course like just just not starving to death would have been
like the primary goal of most people in through throughout history is making sure we have enough food to last through the winter or not,
now food is plentiful with if I have an obesity problem well yeah the lesson there is to be grateful for the way things are now 4 for some of us.
We've spoken about this offline I'd love to get your thought about it here.
If I sat down for a long form in-person conversation with the president of Russia Vladimir Putin would you potentially want to call in for a few minutes to join in on a conversation with them moderated translated by me.
Sure yeah sure I'll be happy to do that.
You shown interest in the Russian language is this grounded in your interest in history of linguistics culture.
General curiosity I think it sounds cool sounds cool not looks cool so well it's you know it's a.
It takes a moment to read Cyrillic once you know what the sort of like,
characters stand for actually then reading Russian becomes a lot easier because there are a lot of words that are actually the same like bank is Bank
and the find the words exactly the same and now you start to understand Cyrillic yeah if you cannot if you can sound it out yeah it's much there's at least some commonality of words
what about the culture.
You you love great engineering physics there's a tradition of the science is there certainly look at the 20th century from rocketry so
some of the greatest Rockets of the space exploration has been done and the Soviet in the former Soviet Union yeah so do you draw inspiration from.
That history just how this culture that in many ways one of the sad things is because of the language,
a lot of it is lost to history because it's not translated all those kinds of things because it it is in some ways an isolated culture and it flourishes within its within its borders yeah
do you draw inspiration from those folks from from the history of yes I assume here in there in the third Union Russia and.
Ukraine as well and it have a really,
strong history in spaceflight like some of the most advanced impressive things in history were done you know by the Soviet Union so.
One can cannot help but admire the Empress of Rocket technology that was developed after the fall of the Soviet Union the there's the there's much less that that happened,
but.
Still things are happening but it's not it's not quite at the frenetic Pace that was happening.
Before the Soviet Union kind of dissolved into separate Republic's.
Yeah I mean II you know there's roscosmos the Russian that agency a.
I look forward to a time when those countries with China working together,
how you in the United States are all working together maybe a little bit of friendly competition but friendly competition is good you know the government's was slow and the only thing slower than one government is a collection of government.
So yeah the Olympics would be boring if everyone just crossed the finishing line at the same time.
Nobody would watch yeah and and proven try hard to run fast and stuff so I think friendly competition is good thing,
this is also a good place to give a shout out to a video titled the entire Soviet rocket engine family tree by Tim Dodd AKA every day off astronaut and second hour and a half
because the full history of Soviet rockets and people should definitely go check on support Tim in general that guy was super excited about the future superx
the sidebar spaceflight every time I see anything by them I just have a stupid smile on my face because he's so excited about stuff yeah well if people think about us really great if you're certain I think through a space he
in terms of explaining rocket technology to your average person he's awesome the vest I'd say and.
I should say like the others and like I switched us from like Raptor at one point was going to be a hydrogen engine.
But hydrogen has a lot of challenges it's very low density it's a it's a deep cryogen so it's only liquid a very,
you're very close to absolute zero requires a lot of insulation it's so it's a lot of challenges there and
I was actually reading a bit about Russian rocket engine development and,
at least impression I had was that after Soviet Union Russia and Ukraine primarily were.
Actually in the process of switching to methyl ox and there were some interesting,
test and data for ISP like they were able to get like after like three hundred eighty s is p with meth locks engine and I was like well okay that's
that's actually really impressive so.
So I think we could you could actually get.
A much lower cost like in optimizing cost per ton to overcast pretend to Mars its I think.
Methane oxygen is the way to go and I was partly inspired by the Russian work on the test ends.
With meth Lux engines.
And now for something completely different do you mind doing a bit of a meme review in the spirit of the great the powerful PewDiePie.
Let's say 10:59 just go over a few documents printed out we can try let's try this.
Okay Vlad the Impaler discovers marshmallows.
Event
so.
Get it because here so you hailing thinks he's like I don't know three butter that's not very good.
This is ground in some engineering some history.
Ha ha ha yeah give us an 8 out of 10 what do you think about nuclear power I'm in favor of nuclear power I think it's.
In a place that is not subject to extreme natural disasters I think it's a nuclear power is a great way to generate electricity I don't think we should be shutting down your clear power stations.
But what about your novel exactly.
So I think people will there's like a lot of fear of radiation and stuff.
And it's I guess we're probably like a lot of people just don't understand they didn't study.
Engineering or physics they don't it's just the word radiation just sounds scary you know so they don't they they can't calibrate what radiation means but radiation is much less dangerous
then then you think so.
Like for example Fukushima you know when the Fukushima problem happened.
Do that tsunami the I got people in California asking me if they should worry about radiation from Fukushima on like.
Definitely not not even slightly not at all that is crazy and just too.
Show like look this is how
like the dangerous is so much overplayed compared to what what are really
is that I actually flew to focus Shima and I donated a solar power system for water treatment plant and and I made a point of
eating locally grown vegetables on TV in Fukushima.
Like I'm still alive okay it's not even at the risk of these events is low but the impact of them is impact is greatly exaggerated
it's just very my nature it's people who don't know what radiation is like I've had people ask me like what about radiation from cell phones according to Courtney brain cancer I'm like we say radiation do you mean photons or particles,
like that I don't know what what do you mean foretells particles I do you mean let's say photons what
what frequency or wavelength in the like that I've no idea like do you know that everything is radiating all the time,
like what do you mean like everything's radiating all time photons are being emitted,
by all objects all the time basically so and if you want to know what it's
what it means to stand in front of nuclear fire go outside the sun is a gigantic.
You know thermonuclear reactor you're staring right at it are you still alive yes okay amazing yeah I guess radiation is one of the words that can be used
as the tool to fear monger
by certain people that's it and I hope you'll start to understand so that's the way to fight that that fear I suppose is to understand is to learn.
Yeah just say like okay how many people have actually died from nuclear accidents it's like practically nothing and say how many people have died from coal plants and it's a very big number so.
Like obviously we should not be starting up coal plants and shutting down nuclear plants just doesn't make any sense at all coal plants like I don't know a hundred to a thousand times worse for for health and nuclear power plants.
You want to go to the next one it's really bad.
So that 90 180 and 360 degrees everybody loves the math nobody gives a shit about 270 it's not super funny.
I don't like two or three yeah this is not you know LOL situation yeah.
That's pretty good,
the United States oscillating between establishing a destroying dictatorships like metres and I'm like yeah what's better yeah yeah it's a out of seven out of ten it's kind of true oh yeah this is,
this is kind of personal for me next one
oh man this is like a yeah well no this is horse like referring to like oh something as like as like a husband husband yeah yeah hello yes this is dog your wife was launched into space and then the last one,
him with his eyes closed and a bottle of vodka yeah like I didn't come back no,
tell you the full story of the you know what what the love the impact they had on the loved ones after that one gets an 11 for me sure the Soviets yeah oh yeah it just keeps going on the Russian theme.
First man in space nobody cares first man on the moon well I think people do care 90 but um.
There is Yuri Gagarin that names will be forever in history I think there is something special about placing like,
stepping foot on to another Charlie foreign land.
It's not the journey like people that explore the oceans it's not as important to explore the oceans is to land on a whole new continent
yeah.
This is about you oh yeah I'd love to get your comments on this your musk after sending 6.6 billion dollars to the UN to end world hunger you have three hours.
Yeah I mean obviously six billion dollars Dhaka and World auger so.
So I mean realities of this point the world is producing,
former fruit that I can really consume it like we don't have a cultic caloric.
Get straight to this point so where there is hunger it is almost always due to like Civil War strive or some like.
It's not a thing that is extremely rare for it to be just a matter of like like lack of money it's like.
Get I was like some those Civil War and some some country and like one part of the country literally try to starve the other part of the country
so it's much more complex than something that money could solve is poly this Geo politics it's it's
a lot of things it's human nature it's governments its money's monetary systems all that kind of stuff yeah fruit is extremely cheap these days it's like this
I mean the u.s. of this point.
Are among low-income families obesity is actually not a problem it's not like obviously it's not hungry it's like.
Too much it's you know too many calories so it's not that nobody's hungry hungry anyway it's just it's just this is a.
Not not a simple matter of adding money and solving it.
What do you think I want to guess this getting too.
Lex is going after Empires world where did you get those artifacts the British museum,
positioned out to Monty Python we found them yeah there was the presume is it's pretty great I mean yeah it really brings it take these historical artifacts from around the world and put them in London but
you know it's not like people can't go see them so it is like a convenient place to see these ancient artifacts is is London for.
You know for a large segment of the world so I think you know unbalanced the British museum is a net good.
Well I'm sure that like countries are talking about that yeah it's like you want to make these historical artifacts accessible to as many people as possible and the British museum I think there's a good job of that.
Even if there's a darker aspect to like the history of empire in general whatever the empires however things were done.
This it is the history that happened you can't sort of erase that history unfortunately you just become better in the future it's the point yeah I mean.
It's like well how are we going to pass while judgment on these things like it's like if.
You know if you give one is gonna judge say the Russian Empire you're going to judge you know what everyone was doing at the time and how were the British relative to everyone.
And I think they would brush would actually get like a relatively good grade relatively good grade not an absolute terms but compared to what everyone else was doing.
They were not the worst like said you got to look at these things in the context of the history at the time
and say what were the Alternatives and what are you comparing it against yes and I do I do not think it will be the case that Britain would get a
a bad grade in when looking at history at the time now if you judge history from you know.
From what is morally acceptable today
you basically are going to give everyone a failing grade yeah I'm not clear so I don't think anyone would get a passing grade in their morality of like you go back 300 years ago like who's getting a passing grade basically no one
and we might not get a passing grade from Generations that come after us what was that one get
sure 6s 7s and I'm a for the Monty Python maybe it was a Monty Python they're great Ryan in the quest Holy Grail or incredible,
yeah that little serious eyebrows is bragging to tell like how important thing is facial hair the two great leadership well you got a new haircut is that is that is this how does that affect your leadership,
I don't know hopefully not it doesn't
the second is no one,
there is no one competing with Reggie I'm not one to those who like epic eyebrows.
So sure that's ridiculous 607 honor I like this like Shakespeare analysis of memes my brother he had a flair for drama as well.
But you know Showmanship yeah it must come from the eyebrows all right.
Invention great engineering look what I invented yeah that's the best thing since reptile bread yeah because they are just.
That sliced bread and my just explaining memes at this point this is what my life has become.
I feel like I'm a meme what it like a you know like a scribe like runs around with the Kings and just like writes down memes I mean where was the cheeseburger inventor that's like an epic convention like.
Like wow you know that was versus just like a burger
or sugar I guess the burger in general is like you know then there's like what is a burger what's a sandwich and then you start getting yes the pizza sandwich and what is the original it's it gets into an ontology
yeah but everybody knows like if you order like a burger a cheeseburger whatever knee like you get like you know tomato and some lettuce and onions and whatever you know
mayo and ketchup and mustard it's like Epic,
yeah but I'm sure they've had bread and meat separately for a long time and it was kind of a burger on the same plate but somebody who actually combined them into the same thing and yeah by didn't hold it make makes it convenient
it's a materials problem if your hands don't get dirty and whatever yeah it's bro.
Well that is now right over of guests for the runners like you you if you order a cheeseburger you know where you getting you know it's not like some up to slyke while wonder what I'll get you know you know Fries Are.
I mean great I mean those are the devil but fries are awesome and
yeah chip pizza is incredible.
Food Innovation doesn't get enough love.
Yeah I guess is what we're getting at Great what about the Matthew McConaughey austenite here.
President Kennedy do you know how to put men on the moon yet NASA no President Kennedy be a lot cooler if you did pretty much sure it's like six or seven articles.
That's the last one hahaha.
That's funny someone drew a bunch of dicks all over the walls Sistine Chapel boys bathroom I'll give it mine.
It's as this really true hi this is our highest ranking meme for today I mean it's like how do they get away with it lots of nakedness dick pics are I mean just something throughout history
as long as people can draw things there's Benedict Vic it's the staple of human history is a staple it systems throughout human history,
you tweeted the aspire to Comedy your friends with Joe Rogan,
might you do a short stand-up comedy set at some point in the future may be open for Joe something like that is that is that looks kinda actual just blown Stand Up full on stand up is that in there or is that I've never thought about that.
It's extremely difficult if at least that's what the like Joe says in the comedian say.
Huh I wonder if I could I mean like one way to find out you know I have done stand-up for friends just impromptu you know I'll get it get on like a roof and they.
They do laugh but their friends too so I don't know if you got a call you know like a room of strangers are they going to actually also find it funny but I could try see what happens I think it learned something either way,
yeah I kind of love both the when you bomb and when when you do great just watching people how they deal with it it's so difficult it's so you're so fragile up there,
it's just you and you do you think you're going to be funny and when it completely Falls flat is just it's beautiful to see people deal with like that might have enough material to do stuff,
I've never thought about it but I might have enough material.
I don't like 15 minutes or something oh yeah yeah do I Netflix special special sure.
What's your favorite Rick and Morty concept.
Just a spring that on user there's a lot of scientific engineering ideas explored there there's the quivering like there's the butter robots there's a great too that's great true,
yeah it's awesome somebody that's exactly like you from an alternate Dimension showed up there Elon tusk.
Yeah that's right there you voiced yeah rigor mortis only explores a lot of interesting Concepts.
So like what's the favor when I know that the butter of our Sydney is you know it's like it's only possible to have too much sentience in a device.
Like you don't have your toast to be like super genius toaster it's going to hit life because all I could just make his toast.
It's like you don't have like super until just stuck in a very limited device you think it's too easy for my if we're talking about from the engineering perspective superintelligence like with Marvin the robot like is it,
it seems like it might be very easy to engineer just a depressed robot.
It's not obvious to engineer and robot that's going to find a fulfilling existence same as humans I suppose but.
I wonder if that's like the default if you don't do a good job on building a robot it's going to be sad a lot.
Well we can reprogram robots easier than we can reprogram humans.
So I guess if you let it evolve without.
Tinkering that might get sad but you can change the optimization function and have it be a cheery robot.
You are like I mentioned with SpaceX you give a lot of people hope and a lot of people look up to you millions of people look up to you if we think about young people
in high school maybe in college what advice would you give to them about.
If they want to try to do something big in this world they want to really have a big positive impact what advice would you give them about their career maybe about life in general.
Try to be useful you do things that are useful to your fellow human beings to the world it's very hard to be useful.
You know I you contributing more than you consume you know like
like can you try to have a positive net Card fusion to society
I think that's the thing to aim for you know not not to try to be sort of a leader for.
For the sake of being a leader or whatever.
If you live a useful life
that is a good life a life with having lived.
You know and I'd like I said I would I would encourage people to.
I used the mental tools of physics and apply them broadly in life.
There are the best tools when you think about education and self-education what do you recommend the so there's the university there is.
Self-study there is a Hands-On sort of finding a company or a place or set of people that do the thing you're passionate about and joining them as early as possible.
There's taking a road trip across Europe for a few years and writing some poetry which which which trajectory do you suggest in terms of learning about.
How you can become useful as you mentioned how you can have the most positive impact.
Encourage people to read a lot of books.
Just basically try to ingest as much information as you can
and try to also just develop it a good general knowledge.
So it's at least have like a rough lay of the land of the knowledge landscape like try to learn a little bit about a lot of things.
Because you might not know what you're really interested in how would you know what you're really interested in if you at least Aunt like doing it peripheral explore exploration of broadly of.
Of the knowledge landscape and talk to people from different walks of life and different.
Industries and professions and skills and our occupations like just right you don't
learn as much as possible.
Man's Search for meaning isn't the whole thing a search for meaning.
Yeah what's the meaning of life and all yeah but just generally I'd like I said I would encourage people to read broadly,
in many different subject areas and and then try to find something where there's
and overlap of your talents and and what you're interested in so people may be good at something but although they may have skill at a particular thing but they don't like doing it so you want to try to find a thing where you have your,
that's a good good combination of your other things that you're inherently good at but you also like doing,
and and reading is a super-fast shortcut to figure out which where are you you both good at it you like doing it,
and it will actually have positive impact what you got to learn about think somehow So reading a broad range it just it really,
read it you know one point was that cat I kind of read through the encyclopedia so that's pretty helpful,
and.
Those are things I need to know existed a lot so obviously and like as broad as it gets it's like L word adjustable I think you know whatever 40 years ago so.
Maybe read through the click the condensed version of the Encyclopedia Britannica I'd recommend that
guys like skip subjects are you read a few paragraphs and you know you're not interested just jump to the next one the so read the encyclopedia or skits skim through it.
And.
But you know put a lot of stock until we have a lot of respect for someone who puts in an honest day's work to do useful things.
And just generally to have like not a zero-sum mindset
or a like have more of a grow the pie mindset like the
if you sort of say like when when I see people like perhaps some click some very smart people.
Kept taking an attitude of like what I like doing things that seem like morally questionable it's often because they have a database sort of axiomatic level a zero-sum mindset.
And and they without realizing it they don't realize they have a zero-sum mindset or they said they don't realize it consciously and so if you have a zero-sum mindset than the only way to get ahead is by taking things from others.
If it's like if the pipe is fixed then the only way to have more pie is to take someone else's pie.
But the this is false like obviously the pie has grown dramatically over time the economic pie so
there are in reality you can have so over use this analogy we have a lot of we can't there's a lot of pie yeah bye-bye is not fixed.
So you really want to make sure you don't you're not operating without realizing it from a zero-sum mindset,
well we're the only way to get ahead is to take things from others then that's going to result in you take try to take things from others which is not not good it's much better to work on adding to the economic pie may you know so.
Quit creating.
Lex it creating more than you consume doing more than you yeah so that's a big deal I think there's like you know a fair number of people in.
In finance that do have a bit of a zero-sum mindset and it's all walks of life I've seen that
I wanted the one of the reasons Rogan inspires me is he celebrates all there's a lot there's not.
Not quitting a constant competition like there's a scarcity of resources what happens when you celebrate others
he promote others the ideas of others it it actually grows that by I mean it every like the the resources the resources become less scarce
and that that applies in a lot of kinds of domains that applies in Academia where a lot of people are very see some funding for academic research is zero sum
is it is not if you celebrate each other if you make if you get everybody to be excited about AI about physics above mathematics I think it would be more and more funding and I think everybody wins yeah that applies I think broadly yeah.
Exactly so the last last question about love and meaning.
What is the role of Love In The Human Condition broadly and more specific to you how has love romantic love are otherwise made you a better person a better human being.
Better engineer now you're asking really perplexing questions,
and so it's hard to give a I mean there are many books poems and songs written about what is love and what is it exactly you know.
Okay what is the figure don't hurt me that's one of the great ones yes yeah you vote you have earlier quoted Shakespeare put that that's really up there yeah let me a Many-Splendored Thing.
I mean there's,
it's because we've talked about so many inspiring things like be useful in the world sort of like solve problems alleviate suffering but.
It seems like connection between humans as a source you know it's the source of joy is the source of meaning and that that's what love is friendship love.
I just wonder if you think about that kind of thing we talked about.
Preserving the light of human consciousness right now it's becoming a multiplet are a multiplanetary species I mean to me at least.
That that means like if we're just alone and conscious and intelligent and it doesn't mean nearly as much as if we're with others right and there's some magic created when we're together.
The the French of it and I think the highest form of it is love which I think broadly is much bigger than just sort of romantic but also yes romantic love and family and those kinds of things,
well I mean the reason I guess I care about us becoming multi-planet species in a spacefaring civilization is foundationally I love Humanity.
And and so I wish to see it prosper and.
Do great things and be happy and
and if I did not love Humanity I would not care about these things.
So when you look at the whole of it the human history all the people has ever lived all the people live now.
It's pretty we're okay on the whole we're pretty interesting Bunch yeah.
All Things Considered and I've read a lot of history including the darkest worst parts of it and despite all that I think on balance.
I still love Humanity you joked about it and with the 42 what do you think is the meaning of this whole thing.
Is it like is there a non numerical actually location yeah it will really I think what dogs Islands were saying in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is that.
The universe is the answer and.
What we really need to figure out our what questions to ask about the answer that is the universe.
And that the question is the really the hard part and if you can properly frame the question then the answer relatively speaking is easy.
So so therefore if you want to understand.
What questions to ask about the university won't understand the meaning of life we need to expand the scope and scale of Consciousness so there were better able.
Understand the nature of the universe and and understand the meaning of life and ultimately the most important part will be to ask the right question.
Yes thereby elevating the role of the interviewer.
Yes exactly as the most important human in the room interview good questions are
you know the heart is hard to come up with good questions absolutely but yeah like like it's like that that is the foundation of My Philosophy is that.
I am curious about the nature of the universe and.
You know and obviously I will die
I don't know when I'll die but I won't live forever.
But I would like to know that we're on a path to understanding the nature of the universe and the meaning of life and what questions to ask about the,
answer that is the universe and and so if we expand the scope and scale of humanity and Consciousness in general which include silicon Consciousness then.
That you know there were that that seems like a fundamentally good thing
Elon like I said
I'm deeply grateful that you would spend you're extremely valuable time with me today and also that you are given millions of people hope and this difficult time this divisive time
in this cynical time so I hope you do continue doing what you're doing thank you so much for talking to that oh you're welcome thanks for your excellent questions.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Elon Musk support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words from Elon Musk himself when something is important enough you do it even if the odds are not in your favor.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
Music.